The problem with doing this build-out on
Earth is that like the marginal cost on
every additional data center goes up
every time you add one because we're
using all the easy places to build
energy projects.
>> Yeah. In space, the marginal cost goes
down for every additional unit because
you're now you're manufacturing at rate
and you're um you know, the more
Starships you fly the cheaper the the
cheaper it gets and all the rest of it.
And so there comes a crossover point
>> [laughter]
>> where it just makes in it makes zero
sense to continue building things on
Earth. Um so uh I think it will be like
close to a trillion dollars per year of
capex spend within 10 years being
deployed in space.
So by far the largest market opportunity
ever.
>> [music]
>> We're thrilled to have with us today
Philip Johnson, founder and CEO of Star
Cloud. You were the first to put up data
centers in space and just a few months
ago your first data center Star Cloud 1
sent back the message to Earth,
"Greetings Earthlings." Or as I prefer
to think of you, a fascinating
collection of blue and green. What a
poetic thing to think about, AI in space
looking back at us. Um congratulations
on what you've done. I'm excited to to
ask you all about data centers in space
for this episode. Uh maybe first to get
started, why build data centers in
space? Yeah. Um so firstly, thanks so
much for having me. It's freaking
awesome to be here. Um so a quick
background on myself. Um I first I mean,
I've been interested in space my whole
life. Um I actually spent a few years
with McKinsey with the space agencies of
uh you know, the different governments
uh around the world and that's where I
started to notice that the launch cost
was very rapidly coming down. Um and so
3 years ago I kind of randomly on a
weekend decided to take a trip down to
Starbase, Texas where SpaceX is building
the Starship launch vehicle. And I think
it just blew me the scale of the new
sort of gigafactories they're building.
I think they're planning to build three
starships per day or something on on
that order.
And so the coming capacity and the
potential launch cost is
you know, orders of magnitude off where
it is today.
And so you know, I started thinking
about okay, well what is that going to
enable? What new businesses will that
enable? And with my co-founder Ezra
and Ezra and I go way back. We grew up
in the same place in the UK.
Um
we started looking at the concept of
space-based solar which is where you
have these huge solar panels in space
and then you somehow beam that power
down. It's not really a new idea. I mean
people have been looking at this since
I think Isaac Asimov in the 40s was
talking about it. Um
the problem with space-based solar is
you lose most of the energy in
transmission from space to earth.
And we very quickly realized okay, well
once we get that power down, you know,
most new energy projects on earth today
are being built to power data centers.
So either it directly or indirectly that
power is going to be going into data
centers. And so if we can find instead
of a cheap way to get the data center to
space,
we don't lose all of that power in
transmission. We can consume that power
close to the source. And that then
became the basis of a white paper that
we put out
in 2024. And from there that's that's
how how the company got going. Well, let
me ask you. So there's a distinction. I
heard a lot in there on it is possible
to do data centers in space.
>> [laughter]
>> What do we need to do data centers in
space? Maybe possible. Why do we need to
do it? Why do we need to go to space?
>> Yeah. No, that's a great question. The
main reason is we are very quickly
running up against constraints on where
and how we can build new energy projects
terrestrially to power data centers. So
for example, if you want to build a new
100 megawatt energy project, you're
looking at a 5 to 10 year lead time just
on the permitting
particularly in North America. And so
for example, if you want to cover 10
square kilometers of countryside with
solar panels, there's There's of people
who are going to be very annoyed about
that.
Um and so you just have these, you know,
we're we're we're very rapidly plowing
towards a a brick wall where it's going
to be extremely difficult to build the
manager products. We've already built in
the easy places. If we could wave a
magic wand and remove the regulatory
constraint, what's the next constraint
we run into?
Um well, it is actually just cheaper to
build things in space once the launch
cost gets below a certain point. So, for
example, with uh
terrestrial solar, which is the cheapest
form of energy we have, you've got three
big costs. The first one I mentioned,
which is the cost of permitted land. The
second is the cost of battery storage
and backup power. And then the last is
the cost of the solar cells themselves.
Um so, in space, number one, we don't
need permitted land. Number two, we
don't need batteries and backup power
because we're 24/7 in the sun. And then
lastly, we need eight times less solar
cuz 1 sq m of solar panel in space
produces eight times the energy of 1 sq
m of solar panel on Earth. And so
there's a break-even point where the
launch cost, which is our main
additional cost in space, where the
launch cost comes below the cost of
those three factors. We see that
break-even to be around $500 a kilo, but
as the cost of permitted land goes up,
which it is going through the roof right
now,
um that break-even point actually comes
even closer to $1,000 a kilo.
But but as I say, even if you're even if
your
permitted land cost is zero, you still
have those other two factors.
Um and so at some point, if you're going
to build data centers anywhere, you
know, once the launch cost is below a
few hundred bucks a kilo,
you're going to do it in space because
it's just cheaper.
What have you learned about maintenance
in space?
Yeah.
It's a great question as well. Um so,
for maintenance, we'll be operating very
similar to the way that Starlink
satellites work in the in the initial
years. We're not going to have robotic
maintenance or anything for the first
few generations at least. And so, that
means we need to have redundancy on the
critical systems, and then we
over-provision things which fail over
time like solar panels, you lose a few
percent per year. It's very very
important that the chips do not have a
higher failure rate in space than they
do on Earth because the chips are one of
the largest uh costs in this. And so
a huge amount of our time, probably 70%
of our engineering time is going on to
the heat problem, and the other 30% is
going on to making the chips as reliable
as possible in space. And that means a
whole bunch of testing in different
particle accelerators. We did two rounds
of testing at the cyclotron proton beam
accelerator in Knoxville, one round of
testing at the heavy ion particles
particle accelerator in Brookhaven
National Lab. And we run it in 24 hours
we can simulate 5 years worth of
radiation. And with that then all of
that data then goes into informing our
choice on shielding and other
you know, software for bit bit flip
mitigations and things like that.
But in terms of what we've learned on
the first satellite, it's actually
the H100 that we have on orbit right now
um we've not had a single restart
failure yet or or
issue that needed a restart from the
chip itself. There are other uh areas
which where we may need to put a bit
more attention to, for example, the
power delivery and solid state drives.
But the actual chip itself is extremely
resilient. And GPU workloads in general
are very resilient. And the reason is
they're stochastic in nature. And so if
you for example, if you type into
ChatGPT, write me a poem about space, it
will give you this two different poems.
The
the quality of the poem will be will be
the same, you know, it will have the
exact the same quality of the output,
but the specific instance will be
different. And so with a bit flip on any
part of that
or on most of the parts of that
workload, it actually doesn't make a
difference to the quality of the output.
So so it's actually it's surprisingly um
uh
resilient.
You said you spend the bulk of your
engineering time on the heat problem.
Yeah. I think most people have this
notion that you know, space is cold and
so therefore it should be an easier
problem.
>> When Sonia says most people, I I thought
that was the case. [laughter]
Until a few until a few months ago.
So, can you just talk about, you know,
what exactly is the heat dissipation
problem and what are you doing to solve
it?
Yeah, for sure. Um so,
yeah, as you mentioned, space is cold
and in general, that's actually
what Once you get far enough down this
rabbit hole, that ends up being great.
Uh what what's not great is that space
is a vacuum and so obviously like a
thermos flask is designed that way
because a vacuum is an insulator. And
so, the only form of heat dissipation
you can have is infrared radiation. And
so, everything
in this world glows in infrared. If you
had a camera on your face, your face
would be glowing in infrared. Um and the
same is true in space and the the amount
that it glows is proportional to the
temperature differential between the
temperature away from your face is or
away from the satellite versus
and it actually scales with the fourth
power of the temperature. So, a very
small increase in the temperature
increases the heat dissipation by a huge
amount. And so, um what the one of the
critical things is we we need to run
these radiators as hot as possible.
There's a few different ways you can do
that. Either you can run try and run the
chips as as hot as possible. The problem
with that is you the chips are, you
know, have a shorter lifetime if you run
them hot.
The other thing you can do is there's a
few ways to artificially boost the
temperature of the radiator. So, things
like heat pipes uh heat pumps, sorry,
which um you can take for example 60°
fluid from the chips and then you can
turn that into 100° radiator temperature
with heat pumps.
Got it. And so, so would you say the
heat heat dissipation problem is like a
solved problem for you all now? You
obviously have one GPU in space. Yeah.
Um what's it going to take to to solve
the problem for, you know, eventually
hopefully gigawatt scale data centers in
space?
>> Yeah, how does it change as you scale?
Yeah. Um so, the first one actually has
a very different thermal management
system than than the next one coming up.
The first one we submerged the entire
motherboard, power systems, GPU, and
everything else in this phase change
material. It's like a
a material that goes from solid to
liquid as it as it heats up. We can't
run that continuously though. That was
merely just to prove out that this
works. The second one is much closer to
the end state, which is is got this
enormous
low cost and low mass deployable
radiator. So, it has liquid we've got a
custom heat sinks next to the GPUs. Runs
past this fluid runs past the GPUs and
then out to this extremely large
deployable radiator.
From that one to the next one just
scaling up it actually is pretty simple.
And so, yeah, we will we've tested this,
you know, in thermal vacuum chambers and
it works. We just need to now put it on
orbit and make sure it actually works on
orbit. And that's going to happen later
this year.
Awesome.
And how much I guess relatively you have
you have one GPU up in space currently.
Mhm. Do you see yourselves launching
>> Oh, you have five now. Well, there no,
there's five Nvidia GPUs on that first
one. The H100 is the one that gets the
press. I [laughter] see. I see. Um
How much I guess what is the launch
capacity so to speak of what can you get
up in a single payload and how big these
you know, do you think these individual
data centers can get? Yeah. So, we're
designing for the Starlink 3.
The next one that we're launching is
around 8 kilowatts. So, pretty small
still.
The one after that, which is what we
we're now designing is the Starlink 3.
It's we can fit
50 of them per Starship and they fit out
of the PEZ dispenser form factor. That
door that Starship has a little slit.
Yeah. Um so, each one of those is about
200 kilowatts, about 3 tons. And so, if
you have 200 kilowatts per
per Starlink 3 satellite and that it's
it's all for inference essentially. That
means you can fit 50. So, it's about 10
megawatts per Starship launch. And so,
once Starship is flying at rate, you
know, we're expecting to fly hundreds of
these per month. And so, you're talking,
you know, several gigawatts of new
capacity per month, tens of gigawatts of
new capacity per year.
So, you mentioned it's It's for
inference. I was wondering about that
because
pre-training you want contiguous
compute. Might be tough if you're
sending everything up in a space.
>> Yeah, yeah. Inference you want low
latency. There's some
you know, there's a speed of light
component getting information to and
from space. Is that a bottleneck at all
or is that is it low latency enough that
it doesn't matter for inference? It's
it's as low latency as Starlink. So, if
you can do any inference workload
through Starlink, you know, if you were
using ChatGPT on your phone through
Starlink for example, it would be
exactly the same. So, sub 50 millisecond
latency 20 around Earth. And that means
any, you know, like if you have a Zoom
call,
that could easily happen with 200
millisecond latency and you wouldn't
notice the the delay there. So,
basically any inference workload, you
know, voice agents for customer service
or back office business processing
agents or video generation or ChatGPT or
anything else can be done with this
constellation. And then maybe slightly
different question but kind of on this
vein. If you had a trillion dollars
Yeah. just sitting in a bank account
and you you had to use it
to build the compute backbone for AGI.
Yeah. How much of that trillion dollars
is going into space? 100%. Okay. All
right. Paint that picture for us.
We really are talking about by far the
largest market opportunity ever. So, we
are talking about trillions of dollars
per year of capex spend going my
best guess is that within 5 to 10 years
at least half of all new compute
capacity is being deployed in space for
the energy. So, the problem with doing
this build out on Earth is that every
additional
data center you add to the grid, like
the marginal cost on every additional
data center goes up every time you add
one because we're using all the easy
places to build energy projects. Yeah.
In space, the marginal cost goes down
for every additional unit because you're
now manufacturing at rate and your
you know, the more Starships you fly the
cheaper the the cheaper it gets and all
the rest of it. And so,
there comes a crossover point
>> [laughter]
>> where it just makes in makes zero sense
to continue building things on Earth.
Um, so
I think it will be like close to a
trillion dollars per year of CapEx spend
within 10 years being deployed in space.
Mhm. So, by far the largest market
opportunity ever. Where and when do you
think we will first cross over? When I
say where and when, I mean like what
geos will become untenable and therefore
you'll need to go up into space.
Um
As soon as Starship is flying
frequently, it will be cheaper to build
data centers in space. So, um my my
guess for for It looks like the first
Starlink payloads will be either end of
this year and early next year.
Starlink V3. Um, and then as I
understand it will be 12 to 18 months
after that that the first commercial
payloads are going up and so that will
be um
yeah, on the order of mid to late 2028.
Mhm. And then once it's flying
frequently, it becomes way cheaper. Do
you think that there's
you know stuff that needs to be solved
in terms of data transmission? Like do
we need optical lasers uh sending data
back and forth up there in order to kind
of
what once we're operating data centers
at at scale in space? And are those all
solved problems?
>> Mesh network in space.
>> That's all Yeah, it didn't used to be
until two or three years ago, but um you
know, Starlink has basically solved
that. And there's a bunch of other
constellations coming online, Amazon Leo
uh Kepler
um and also once we have a a few of our
own satellites
we can do our own uh optical backhaul.
Um Mhm. So, that that yeah, that problem
would have been a big problem until
quite recently, but it's not so
>> each Pez dispenser will be its own
data center. Do you see them ever, you
know, coming together? You you had that
you know, that picture that concept
photo in your in your first white paper.
Do you do you see them being able to
dock onto each other? Eventually, yeah.
Um it doesn't really make too much sense
to do that initially because the only
reason you would do that is if you want
to train a large model in space. And to
train a frontier model, you need
whatever the largest data center on
Earth is, you need at least that in
space. So, right now that might be like
300 MW or something.
Um you know, it's going to be a long
time before we're going to be able to
dock together 300 MW structure in space
and by the by that time the biggest one
on Earth will probably be 3 GW. So, it's
like a moving goalpost. And the other
thing to say about that is
training at the end state will be less
than 1% of all AI workloads that are
being done. And so, it's just not a very
good market to go after anyway.
Um
yeah. We We showed it in the in the
initial video cuz we didn't want people
to come back and say
you know, you can't do training in
space. And we're like, "Well, you could
if you wanted to, but it's probably not
ideal for the initial."
>> [laughter]
>> That is more of a provocative photo. Um
what about you mentioned at the very
beginning robots. Like, do you think
we'll end up having maintenance robots
in space to to maintain these data
centers? Yeah.
Um I don't think we'll necessarily be
maintaining our small inference
um nodes.
But certainly we'll have fleets of
robots building large structures in
space. Um I mean, they'll definitely be
on the moon. Uh like if you're going to
build big manufacturing facilities on
the moon, essentially something like
Optimus will be doing that. Like, an
Optimus robot doesn't require too much
modification to work in space. You just
essentially put it in a space suit and
that takes care of the thermal and
radiation aspects of it. So, like a
human doesn't
>> going to go maintain your Not really cuz
they're too small. Um each one's only
200 kW. So, we just need to make sure
that they're um
if we docked it together, then yeah, you
could have Optimus maintaining it, but
you wouldn't fly Optimus between each of
ours and
um or maybe you would. I don't know. Um
that does start to sound a bit sci-fi.
What's [laughter] the What's the useful
life on them and how do you retire them?
Um it's about So, we're designing it to
be the same as useful life of the chips,
so 5-6 years. Yeah. Um potentially
possibly longer actually in space cuz
our marginal cost of energy once we're
launched is is zero. So, there's an
argument to be made that that we can run
them longer. Um but end of life for now
is the same as Starlink, so deorbit. Um
uh there is is
you know, another possibility which is
putting them in some kind of um
graveyard orbit they call it.
But for now it's just the orbit. What
goes into making a great like you guys
have a bunch of mechanical engineers,
satellite engineers. Like what goes
actually into the engineering of of
solving this and what are the core
competencies you look for?
Yeah, so as mentioned the two biggest
challenges are the thermal and and
the high radiation environment of space.
So for the thermals we've got for
example the guy from NASA's Jet
Propulsion Laboratory who designed the
radiator for all of the thermal system
for the Europa Clipper mission. That was
NASA's largest most expensive deep space
mission ever. He also designed the
thermals on the
Firefly lunar lander and for three of
the NASA payloads. And then another guy
from Amazon
Kuiper or Leo constellation now who was
lead thermal engineer there. And then a
bunch of people from SpaceX
for the thermal side of things. And then
for the radiation testing side of things
my co-founder Ardy has previously
launched a bunch of GPUs and did all did
all this kind of
parts of the accelerator testing and
stuff. Has anything surprised you from
the testing?
Um
a few things but it's this is like our
core IP Yeah.
>> [laughter]
>> Um
we're a bit tight-lipped about some of
the things. Yeah. Um it's okay it's a
friendly audience.
>> [laughter]
>> Like so you very much seem like a SpaceX
Elon maxie based on some of the things
you've said. What do you think of some
of the alternative
uh space launch companies?
Uh
I'm very you know
hopeful and positive about them in
general but I mean Elon I mean
you guys have a massive SpaceX position
so you guys are presumably SpaceX maxies
too.
>> [laughter]
>> Um and what a great investment from
Shawn by the way like I think it was
Shawn. Um
Um SpaceX like I think Shawn said it's
the best company ever. I do think SpaceX
is the best company ever. I think
they're like unbelievable what they're
pulling off. Um
so they're now they're just so far ahead
of everybody else. Like the other
companies that could do you need a
reusable upper stage to be anywhere
close to cost competitive. So you have
Stoke Space Relativity is potentially
going to look at it. Um
I think that New Glenn is going to the
the Blue Origin rocket They haven't
announced it but they've started hiring
for heat shield
engineers and you would only do that if
you have a reusable upper stage. Um and
then Rocket Lab I don't think they're
even trying. So
even if they were to start now you've
got a 5 to 10 year long development
cycle on a reusable upper stage. And to
that end you guys partner with them
uh they're they're your launch partner.
Um how did it feel to
to be to be building building something
where you know now Elon is also stated
that his intention is to put a lot of a
lot of data center capacity up in space.
Yeah yeah.
Uh so SpaceX are amazing partners like
our company definitely wouldn't exist
without the rideshare program and in
general they're like extremely
um you know
they they work hard to
foster the whole ecosystem. I mean they
launch their own competitors. They
launch
uh
Amazon Leo the Kuiper constellation.
They launch OneWeb which is both direct
competitors to
uh Starlink and they open source their
patents and things like that. So yeah we
love working with with SpaceX.
Um in terms of like the way that I think
this plays out because
you're right now they're going extremely
aggressively into building their own
data centers. So SpaceX
will have a lower cost base than us
because they own the launch.
I think the way that we fit into this is
is kind of twofold.
Um number one SpaceX are mainly going to
be serving their own workloads so Grok
and Tesla and others.
They may offer a third party cloud
service but as I understand there's no
intention to offer a box that people can
put their own chips on and then which is
the core offering that where we have
which is we essentially give people a
box and it has power cooling and
connectivity and then they can put
whatever chip architecture they want in
there and sell to whichever customers
they want. So, you can think of us more
like Equinix while SpaceX might be more
like AWS or something like that. Um
but um so they they they will have a
lower cost base than us, but we will
have a lower cost base than all of the
hyperscalers.
So, the way I see this playing out, if
it's true that on a sort of 5 to 10-year
time frame, most new data center
capacity is being deployed in space,
what's going to happen is in 3 years
once Starship is flying frequently,
all of the hyperscalers are going to
realize this and they're going to be
like, oh
Like if we don't have access to
space compute, we are screwed because we
can't scale anywhere near as fast as
those that do. And so that that point
they have three options, I think. So,
one is
you know, they can
um
pay Elon for his space data center
capacity and for sure some of them will
do that. That would be a good option.
Some of them won't. Um you know, I think
lots of um
it seems like unlikely that OpenAI or
Meta or Google or Microsoft would do
that.
Or they can start building their own
satellites. Again, some of them might do
that. It seems unlikely. I mean
Google for example say they're doing
what we're doing. What they're actually
doing is they're paying Planet Labs to
do a demo in 2027.
Um
which I mean, yeah, it seems like
they're not moving particularly
aggressively if they are doing that.
Um or they'll look around and they'll
say, "Okay, who has the most We need to
move quickly on this. Like who has the
most advanced capability in the market?"
And at that point we'll be by far the
most advanced in terms of what's
deployed on orbit and the engineering
team and all the IP that we have.
Um so, I think at that point we become
an interesting partner with those guys.
Um
and I do mean partner, not necessarily
just acquisition target, you know, I
think there is a
a relation a customer relationship where
we provide the infrastructure energy and
they they do the
uh the cloud providing part of it. Well,
yeah, and I have the business model
question then. Why choose the Equinix
business model versus AWS or or even
Akamai? It's a good question. Yeah,
we've been certainly at the cloud um
like being a cloud provider ourselves.
In the initial early days we will
probably have to do something like that
because
um nobody's going to trust us with their
chips until we've proved that it works a
few few times.
Um
we would much rather be an
infrastructure and energy play than a
cloud provider. And the reason is our
core like the core IP of the company and
the core skill that we're good at is
building satellites that can dissipate
heat and protect you from radiation. We
don't necessarily want to rebuild, you
know, AWS has spent 20 years building an
incredible application layer on top of
AWS and customers don't necessarily
want, you know, to not be able to use
that functionality.
Um and so the other point of it is the
most expensive part of all of this is
the chips and we would rather have
somebody else finance the chips and, you
know, they can decide whatever chip
architecture they want and all the rest
of it. You know, maybe in the in in much
further down the line it
it will make sense for us to offer have
a cloud offering but um
initially I think there's a great
business and it's also much higher
margin. Now yeah, depending on which way
you look at it it's kind of much higher
margin, yeah. Okay, I have a question
about real estate. Yep.
How does real estate work in space?
Because
>> Yeah. earlier you were saying one of the
issues on on Earth is running out of
physical real estate to go build data
centers on. How does real estate work in
space and as space gets more crowded,
how do you think it will work?
Yeah, I mean for now it's essentially
first come first served
and so we've just filed for a
constellation of 88,000 it would allow
us to deploy about
>> you file with? Uh in the US you file
with the FCC. If you're going to
interact with US constellations you have
to if if not, which actually in this
state we won't, you can pick any
regulator in the world.
Um and then they are under the ITU, the
the sort of global governing body. It's
weird that the FCC manages this but like
I also think that's weird. I think it's
a legacy from the days when the only
thing satellites did was communication
and RF spectrum and things like that.
Now they're going to Now they're doing
much more. It's
It's a bit of a legacy hangover that the
FCC is. So real estate today is first
come, first serve. How about 10 years
from now? 10 years from now I expect it
will be the
certainly the most valuable slots will
get filled up and then it will probably
be that whoever got them first will have
the right to sell them.
Pad's about to figure out how to be a
our overlord
landlord in space right now.
>> space commercial real estate guy.
>> [laughter]
>> All right, question about security. How
does security work in space? So let's
say a bunch of critical workloads are
running on your satellites and somebody
decides to attack them. Like how does
that work? Yeah.
I mean we have a very good precedent for
this which is the Starlink satellites.
So
um
like in Ukraine for example, the
military is using them. So if Russia
It's not that Russia hasn't tried or
doesn't want to take out Starlink
satellites. They definitely do want to.
It's a lot easier to blow up a data
center even if you're Russia to blow up
a data center in Virginia than it is to
blow up a data center moving at 27,000
kilometers an hour
in lower earth orbit.
And so if that were to happen I mean
that would be considered an act of war.
Um
where where the Starlink satellites are
flying right now they're flying much
lower than they used to and so
there's no sort of real risk of a
Kessler type of like a
chain effect destroying lower earth
orbit.
Um
So yeah, I mean the US That is the
primary function of space forces to
They're They're now building a whole
bunch of interceptors and things to
deter nations. Yeah, exactly.
>> And I I just have a trouble visualizing
how big space is. So this may be a
gigantically dumb question. But as
[laughter] as we get to this kind of
Dyson sphere like there's 100 gigawatts
more than that in space. Yeah. Is it
Does it get to the point where there's
just less light coming through the
atmosphere cuz we have so much up there
in in LEO? That's a great question. Um
not the way that we've designed it. Um
which is we're going to fly in this what
they call a dawn-dusk sun-synchronous
orbit and it's actually good for us,
it's good for astronomy, it's good for
the fact that you don't block stuff out.
So, like let's say this is the Earth or
let's say like this is the Sun and this
is the Earth. It's not like we're flying
around like this. We fly over the poles
and so we never cast a shadow on the
Earth and we also never in Earth's
eclipse. So, we never go behind the
shadow of the Earth either. Interesting.
>> Um yeah. So, and it's great cuz then it
means we don't
we're only visible in the night sky at
dawn or dusk. Yeah.
>> And so, we don't then have problems with
astronomy and all the rest of it. Mhm.
Yeah.
Okay, there's been some As As A So in
space has become a almost a memetic
thing thanks to you. Uh there's also
been some fierce criticism of it. Um
what do you think is the chief
criticism? You know, what actually
resonates to of the criticism and and
what would you say is unfounded?
Yeah.
I think things like the thermal problem
is is like pretty easily solvable. Um
sometimes people put a cost equation out
where they're still using the Falcon 9
launch cost. And you know, I say to
people like if you don't think the
launch costs are going to kind of come
down then we're like a terrible
business. If you do then, you know, we
may be the biggest business ever. Um
the one that
not many people talk about but that is
actually probably the most significant
is we need the chips not to have a
higher failure rate in space than on
Earth because the chips are such an
expensive part of what we're doing. Even
if they have like a 10% higher failure
rate
that would basically wipe out all of the
savings from the
um
from the energy.
Speaking of which, what are the
components of the ideal space data data
center?
We sort of simplify and just say GPUs in
space.
GPUs, CPUs, memory, cooling, like what
what what all has to
go in the box? Yeah, it's much simpler
than most satellites. Okay. Because most
satellites, for example, the Starlink
satellites, a huge portion of the mass
and the cost is these phased array
antennas.
We don't need any anything like that. Um
so, it's pretty simple. It's
um solar panels, radiators, the box,
like the bus.
The chips, and the chips obviously then
come with memory,
uh motherboard, power system.
Um although, we need very small
batteries. Um
you can't send power directly from the
solar panels to the chips, so you need
some buffer in there, but we don't need
to have 24 hours of battery storage,
which you do for most uh data centers on
Earth.
Um but, that's basically it. One
reaction wheel, because which is
uh extremely unusual. Most satellites
have at least three reaction wheels.
They're very heavy, because they they
need to turn the satellites as it spins
up, it needs to turn the satellite. We
only need one cuz the satellite's very
long, and you have this grav- this like
natural stabilization from the gravity
gradient between the closest point to
the Earth and the furthest away point to
the Earth. Mhm. And so, you need to need
a reaction wheel in this axis.
Uh it's not going to move either this
way or this way. Mhm. Um
and then, two lasers for communication.
And so, you can strip out a lot of the
stuff that goes into land-based data
centers then. Yeah, lots of the stuff. I
mean, chillers, cooling towers,
batteries, backup power, um
AC to DC converters, um
yeah, there's a whole bunch of things we
can strip out. Like, that's why So, like
a huge component of cost saving that
most people don't talk about. Most
people are talking about the fact, okay,
let's say we can do 3 cents per kilowatt
hour on the energy um versus 8 cents per
kilowatt hour. That's one part of it.
The second part of it is our um
infrastructure cost is instead of, you
know, you're looking at 15 to 20 million
dollars per megawatt for new
infrastructure for a data center on
Earth. So, that's all the things like
chillers, cooling towers, bat-
batteries, backup. Um
for us, it's only less than 5 million
dollars megawatt.
Um and that's cuz it's just literally
solar panels, radiators. There's like
nothing else, really.
>> [laughter]
>> You said 3 cents to 8 cents. Is that
roughly where you think the the power
costs are coming in? Uh our all-in
energy cost in the end state will be
much lower than half a cent per kilowatt
hour.
Um including the launch cost. Wow. Yeah,
the 3 cents is what we've signed for
with one of the
uh with one of our like LOIs.
Yeah. Okay, I see why this is going to
be one of the biggest big businesses of
all time. Um how are you thinking about
sequencing out Do you have customers
already? Do you have contracts lined up?
Like what do What do you think will be
the first workloads that you're running
commercially in space?
Yeah, so we've sequenced it where
um you know, there's a bit of
uncertainty about the timeline of
Starship. And so, the first few
satellites are designed to provide edge
and cloud services for other spacecraft,
particularly military um and government
satellites and earth observation
satellites. And so, yeah, we'll be
running workloads for uh various
military customers. We already are
actually on Star Cloud one.
Um and you can basically keep the
business running for as long as it takes
to keep until Starship is ready on those
types of contracts. You know, they're on
the order of a thousand times more
dollars per hour for GPU time than a
terrestrial contract would be or if
you're competing with terrestrial. So,
that's this one we're launching later
this year. We're launching another one
next year, very similar, Star Cloud two
and Star Cloud 2.1.
Um and we can basically just keep doing
that. If say Starship would would delay
two years or three years, we can just
keep launching these in um
you know, edge nodes for other
spacecraft.
Um and then as Starship ramps up, then
we'll be launching the Star Cloud three
satellite. And that's the first one
which is cost competitive with
terrestrial data centers. Hm.
For your space customers, is there a
reason they're they can't just run their
workloads on land-based data centers and
beam it up versus yeah? Yeah, the main
reason is um we're hugely constrained on
the amount of data you can downlink from
space to earth. So, for example, like a
SAR satellite, synthetic aperture radar,
they might be collecting 5 GB of data a
second.
Then they have to wait for a ground
station cuz they they're only
transmitting data through this very slow
RF at the moment. Um
when they're above the ground station,
they might be getting 1 GB a second data
rate, GB not GB. So, much slower than
um
you know, the amount of data they're
collecting. And so, right now they just
throw away 90% of the data they collect
or they just or it's just not used.
Um
And so, in future if you know, any
satellite that can connect in with
terminal two the transport layer like
the SDA, Space Telemetry Agency has this
transport layer
will be able to connect to us. They can
ship enormous amounts of data to us
through optical in space. And then we
can run inference workloads on that in
space. And that might be for example
identifying a vessel in a normal you
know, they might send us 10 TB of data
of just ocean. We can then identify the
location of a vessel in that. Um at the
moment they don't have the processing
power on board to to do that.
Interesting. So, the initial workloads
are likely to be data that is collected
in space.
>> processed in space. Yeah, exactly.
>> Yeah, that makes sense. Okay, you spend
a lot of time in space.
Aliens.
>> [laughter]
>> Great topic. I love this. I'm so
excited.
>> Are there aliens?
>> [laughter]
>> Um
there almost certainly has been aliens
in our galaxy. There's almost certainly
aliens alive in the universe.
Doesn't look like there's any
intelligent life in our galaxy right
now. Mhm. Um Why do you say there almost
certainly has been?
Um
If if if you're familiar with the Fermi
paradox, like the idea this like
question of why yeah. Go ahead and
explain it though. Uh so, Fermi paradox
is the idea it's
we should see more life in our galaxy
than we do. Or we should perhaps see
life everywhere in our galaxy. If there
had been life anywhere on there's sort
of 400 billion stars in our planet in
our galaxy each with 10 planets. So,
you're talking about 4 trillion planets
in our galaxy alone. And there's by the
way trillion trillion galaxies. But just
in our galaxy, the Milky Way.
Um and each one has been habitable for
the last 10 billion years. So we've got
4 trillion planets
uh possible potentially habitable for
the last
um
10 billion years.
It would seem there's two possibilities.
Either we are staggeringly rare, and
that is a possibility.
Unbelievably rare. We're literally the
first to reach this um level of
complexity
in our galaxy's history.
Or
intelligent life is somewhat
short-lived. Now, my
working hypothesis at the moment is that
intelligent life is somewhat
short-lived. And so, yeah, they they
call them the Fermi great filters. If we
are extremely rare, the first the Fermi
great filter is probably something like
moving from single-cellular life to
multi-cellular life. Like that is
extremely hard for life to do, let's
say.
Um if the Fermi great filter is in in
front of us, which personally I believe
it is,
uh that means
let's say once you hit
superintelligence, you know, it wouldn't
take very long for a swarm of a million
killer AI drones to make mincemeat of
both themselves and the planet. Um and
we're building swarms of a million
AI killer drones. Um so,
like
yeah, to me it wouldn't be surprising if
if in the next, you know, few hundred to
a thousand years
um we do not pass
the great filter. Um
maybe it's a little bit doomerism. Like
the other alternative is we're literally
the first, and I'm quite happy to
continue living life as if we might be
the first. Um you know, I think we
should send probes out to other stars,
and I think we should um
you know, explore expand and explore the
galaxy and all the rest of it. Yeah, but
but in terms of why do I think um
there's been others? Yeah, I just think
it seems pretty unlikely if on 4
trillion planets for 10 billion years
we're literally the first to have
reached this level of complexity. All of
them would have probably seen They would
have all understood the Fermi paradox,
too. They would have all looked around
and been like, wait, cuz it only takes 1
million years or 2 million years to
colonize the whole galaxy from the point
we're at now, you know, even with
the Voyager probe technology, you can
get to Alpha Centauri in about 50,000
years, which is like the blink of an eye
in galactic and evolutionary time
scales. So, you can you can you know, we
could send self-replicating probes to
every star in the galaxy within about 2
million years. Like,
we don't see that anywhere, any any
evidence of Dyson spheres or
intelligence in our galaxy at all. Um
and so
yeah,
I to me it's pretty likely there's been
intelligence in our galaxy and it has
not survived very long. What's your
opinion? Yeah.
Well, I don't know if I have an opinion
on that, but I had a question for you as
a follow-up, which is um
the
Well, by the way, on that, the other
thing that I think is an interesting
theory is the you know, ants by the side
of the road hypothesis, which is
intelligent life is not short-lived,
we're just irrelevant to it. Um I I like
that, too, but you would see Dyson
spheres all across our galaxy. Like, it
wouldn't be difficult Like, if you're an
ant in the middle of Manhattan, you're
not like, where are the humans? Like,
you know, like, the humans [laughter]
are pretty obvious, you
Yeah. Yeah. Um yeah. The question I have
though is you mentioned um earlier
talking about
uh sticking Optimus in a space suit and
sending it to Moon. And so, clearly
you've thought about kind of the
steps to becoming an interplanetary
species, you know, starting with the
moon and Mars and whatever. How do you
see that rolling out?
Um
I I mean, I The only thing I have to
really go by is the plans that Elon has
been putting out. It seems like that's
by far the most likely. Um like, the
Artemis programs, honestly, are
seem like a bit of a disaster. Um
but
Elon's road map is unbelievably Like, I
think they can actually execute on that.
So,
>> Yeah. and there's a reason to do it now.
Um like, building mass drivers and
shooting AI satellites from the moon is
like an extremely strong economic
incentive for getting to the moon. Um
and then once we've done that, we'll go
to Mars. So, yeah, in my lifetime I
think we'll have people on Mars. I think
we'll have
you know, cities on the moon in my
lifetime.
What do you think are the best business
models in space?
Other than data centers.
>> [laughter]
>> Definitely data centers is the best one.
Uh there's a whole bunch. Um
I think asteroid mining will be a huge
business at some point, you know, it
might take quite a while.
Um
you know,
tourism, lunar hotels, lower orbit
hotels will be a big business.
>> one of the slots yet?
>> From Skylab, GRU. Uh
I don't have 200 grand. I think that's
how much it [laughter] costs.
But no, I
I think it's probably quite a way off
and I think SpaceX is probably
very well positioned to do that. Um and
Elon even said he's going to enlighten
and enable people to get to the moon.
So,
um
and then what else? I think yeah,
manufacturing in space will be a big
business.
Um
there's many more communications
businesses that will be built.
Um
Manufacturing what in space?
Well, at the moment, you know, companies
like Varda are doing um
uh crystal structures, particularly for
uh medicine and other things, but that's
purely because they want to take
advantage of the lower
of the microgravity. I think over time,
just because you can get access to more
energy in space, it will be um you can
do lots of things. If you for example,
if you wanted to
do refining of
material from the lunar surface or from
asteroids, you you know, you can use the
energy in space to do that.
Similar to the alien question, uh do you
think AI's going to help us understand
the universe? Like is the universe
conscious, things like that? I hope so.
Yeah, yeah. I mean,
AI will understand the universe a lot
better than we do.
Um
like what's coming with AI is something
that's a trillion trillion times smarter
than all of humanity combined.
Um so, it will have a much better grasp
on
the
the reality of the universe than we do.
And whether it's able to explain that to
our dumb
human brains is another question, but
>> [laughter]
>> What are you most excited for it to
teach you?
I would love to understand more about
consciousness. I think that would be the
most interesting thing to me.
Particularly the hard problem of
consciousness and why
um, seemingly robotic you know,
things like humans have
qualia and intentionality and
uh, have a have sensations and like the
Yeah, just consciousness in general I'd
be very interested to understand.
I agree.
>> What about you? Same answer. Oh, yeah.
Nice.
Are there What about you? You have a Mm,
on that one. How do I make How do I
maximize multiple money [laughter]
returns?
>> Maximize that multiple money returns for
Lower Carbon Partners while while
helping founders build legendary
companies from day one [laughter] to IPO
and beyond.
Um, no, I agree. You guys are using AI
quite a lot internally, right?
>> Yeah. So, I did this when we went to
fundraise I was like, "Okay, I'm going
to ask Gemini which space data center
startup it would invest in
if it was like What'd it say? Start
Cloud. I was like, "Yes." I love it.
Nice way to do it.
>> [laughter]
>> Good job, Gemini.
Maybe it's cuz it knows I run Start
Cloud or I don't know. It's maybe it's a
sycophantic. But I try I tried it with
different windows and like
>> [laughter]
>> But if I was a VC I would 100% do the
same thing, like
Maybe it's more sophisticated than that.
We're doing We're doing everything. So,
for example, there's all this signal and
uh,
what kind of infrastructure and tools
that the models recommend you to use and
those companies
>> Oh, that's going to be So, we're we're
mining that right now as an example.
There's There's just so many ways to be
creative, I think. Yeah. And like our
younger people are probably the most
token hungry, token consumptive, and
they're each kind of figuring out
different creative ways to to do things.
Yeah, yeah. I posted on our Slack
yesterday.
I tried to be like slightly
This might sound like um,
this might sound like a weird way to
phrase this but I posted
like monthly reminder that I'm not going
to be happy until every engineer is
spending $10,000 a month on tokens.
Yeah, yeah. [laughter]
I know they're going they're saying
they're going
that surely is not the right metric to
track.
>> [laughter]
>> But I just don't want them to be like
I want to I want to really drum into
them like this is literally what I
expect and I will be happy when they're
spending 10 grand a month on tokens. So
if
like sometimes they come to me and say
Can we spend 300
Can we spend 300 bucks a month on Grok
for heavy? It's like
yes.
>> [laughter]
>> In the end state how much of GDP do you
think will be spent on inference?
99.9%. Wow. So as in I think we're
building a Dyson sphere and a Dyson
sphere will be
almost all of the physical economy.
Um
So yeah you know in sort of 500 to 1,000
years um
99.9% of
the economy will be space compute.
And that almost all of that will be
inference. Unfortunately, 1,000 years is
outside of our investment
time [laughter] frame but I agree with
you. In the end I mean it depends what
you mean by end state. Yeah, I mean in
the next few decades it's going Have you
seen the percentage the the charts of
like percentage of
um
electricity consumption that goes into
compute or anything like this. That that
graph is not stopping till it gets to
99.9%.
>> Yeah.
Awesome.
This was so cool.
Philip, thank you for joining us today.
You live in the future and you brought
that future to us I think faster than we
could have ever hoped and so thank you
for joining us today. This is an awesome
conversation.
>> Thank you so much for having me. Thank
you. Thank you.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Mhm.